Right now we have more than
7 billion people on the earth.
And our ranks are
growing quickly.
At the same time,
as automation grows,
we have less need
for so many workers.
The poet, Wendell Berry,
asked the question,
"What are people for?"
This has never seemed more
pertinent, more important
for us to answer.
Alan Watts noted that
just as the apple tree
naturally produces
fruits, as he put it,
"The apple tree apples."
The earth is
peopling, constantly
making more and more of us.
Just as apple seeds
spread to other orchards
and make more apple trees,
it might make sense,
by analogy, that the
destiny of humanity
is to settle other worlds.
In the future, I tend to
think that humanity will
aim in two directions at once.
On the one hand,
I mean, why not?
Why not build star ships
and colonize space?
On the other, why not
explore the inner dimensions
of the psycho cosmos, the realms
known to shamans and mystics
through time?
Ultimately, we may learn
that the inner dimensions
within the psyche are just as
fast as the outer dimensions
of the cosmos.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[APPLAUSE]
Hey there.
Welcome to this episode
of "Mind Shift."
I'm Daniel Pinchbeck,
and today we'll
be interviewing, discussing
with Howard Bloom, author
of "The Lucifer Principle,"
"The God Problem,"
and a number of other books.
We'll then be introducing Howard
to two young entrepreneurs,
Amber Lasciak and Miki Agrawal.
NARRATOR: Bloom's
fascination with science
started at a young age.
And he dove into the
study of microbiology,
theoretical physics, and
cosmology at the age of 10.
At 16 he worked
as a lab assistant
in the world's largest
cancer research facility
and went on to graduate
Magna Cum Laude
and Phi Beta Kappa from NYU.
He then did the
unthinkable and turned down
four graduate school fellowships
to form his own music
publicity company.
The Howard Bloom
Organization became
one of the top
publicity companies
in the music industry.
And Howard was instrumental
in building or sustaining
the careers of Prince,
Michael Jackson,
Bob Marley, Paul Simon, Queen,
KISS, AC/DC, among many others.
He also has written several
well-respected and widely
successful books-- "The Lucifer
Principle," "A Scientific
Exploration in the
Forces of History,"
"The Genius of the
Beast-- A Radical Revision
of Capitalism," "Global Brain--
The Evolution of the Mass
Mind From the Big Bang
to the 21st Century,"
and "The God Problem-- How
a Godless Cosmos Creates."
Howard Bloom is considered by
many to be one of the greatest
living thinkers.
And according to Britain's
Channel 4, next in a lineage
of seminal thinkers
that includes Newton,
Darwin, Einstein, and Freud.
[APPLAUSE]
Howard, thank you so
much for joining us.
-It's great to see you.
When we originally met
a number of years ago,
I think I visited you.
And you were bedridden
at that point.
Absolutely stuck
in bed for 15 years.
And for five years,
too weak to speak,
too weak to have another
person in the room.
You came in when I was
able to talk again.
It was-- what was the syndrome?
It's chronic fatigue syndrome.
It's vicious.
It's nasty.
It's brutal.
And it teaches you all kinds
of amazing lessons about life.
And how did you finally shake
it, just out of curiosity?
A good question.
A combination of
drugs, pharmaceuticals
from big pharma, specifically
one called Gabapentin.
Another drug that I have to
give myself a shot of every day.
It's oxytocin.
It's the social hormone.
It's the bonding hormone.
Makes a huge difference.
And God knows what else, Daniel.
Oh.
So tell us a little
bit about Howard Bloom.
Who is he?
What are all-- what are all
these-- these massive tomes?
Well, I was a kid who nobody
wanted in Buffalo, New York,
when I was a little kid,
this grim industrial town.
And at the age of 10, when
I was very, very alone
and very, very
depressed, two guys
reached out to save my life.
One was they reached
out through books.
One was Galileo.
And the other one was
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek.
And a book that
appeared on my lap
one day, in my great
big living room
said, the first two principles
of science, the first two rules
of science are these--
the truth at any price,
including the
price of your life.
And that resonated with me.
It was a law of courage.
And the second
law of science was
look at things right
under your nose
as if you've never
seen them before.
Look at things that you
and everybody around you
take for granted as if you
have never seen them before.
And then proceed from there.
And that was it.
I had a religion, those
two laws, science.
And my life was
saved by two guys
who had reached out over 350
years to grab me before I fell.
Nice.
If there was-- if you were
to sum up all the books that
you've-- that you've written
and the thoughts that
you've assimilated in,
like, a concise paragraph,
what would you say kind of,
like, your project is in a way?
My project is to take
every single science
that a limited
brain can possibly
grasp, to put them together
with all the history
that you can possibly assemble.
I've been assembling
it for 60 years now.
I'm 70 years old.
And with all of the arts, all
of the insights from the arts,
all of the insights from your
territories, from mysticism,
put them together
into a big picture
to fashion new lenses with which
people could see everything
inside of them and
everything around them
in ways they've never
imagined before.
And what's the
ultimate advantage
of having that new lens
or that new perspective?
The ultimate advantage
to the individual
is that one of the greatest
things in the world, one
of the most exhilarating
things you can possibly possess
is insight.
Insight every day, being able
to look at the pen in your hand
and suddenly see it as if you've
never seen-- seen it before,
as if it's a freaking miracle.
And in addition, to be able
to get an intellectual sense.
Not just a sense of wonder.
Not just a sense of awe,
but a sense of where it fits
in the world, in a new way.
That's one of the greatest
highs you can possibly imagine.
Well, let's go through
a few of the books just
step-- one by one here.
"The Lucifer Principle,"
what was basically your sort
of thrust with that book?
Well, Dorion Sagan
and Lynn Marguilis.
Dorion Sagan is Carl
Sagan's oldest son.
Lynn Margulis was
Dorion Sagan's mother
and Carl Sagan's first wife.
And she's a National Medal
of Science winning biologist.
The two of them had written an
article in which they exalted
over a mass die
off that happened
roughly two billion years ago.
And it exalted over it
because it's the mass
die off that made
the kinds of cells
that make you and me up today.
This is when the [INAUDIBLE]--
This is The Great
Oxygen Catastrophe.
-Right, right, right.
-Yeah.
It's when--
-Can you explain what happened?
It's when-- cyanobacteria,
for about 2 billion years,
have been pulling off
a goddamned miracle.
They have been snatching photons
which could destroy things.
They've been snatching
radiation from the air
and knitting it together with
elements of the air and water
and creating bio stuff, creating
cell stuff, creating life.
And the problem was there
was stuff they could process.
There was stuff they
couldn't process.
So they took the stuff
they could process.
And they turned out life and
more life and even more life.
And it was an amazement.
It was a wonder.
But they had to
fart out the stuff
that they could not process.
It was a toxic waste.
Now, look, a colony--
bacteria-living colonies,
they're not individuals.
They live in big groups.
And they're groups of
seven trillion, roughly.
More-- more-- more
bacteria in one
group than all the humans who've
ever lived on planet Earth.
And one of those colonies could
fit on the palm of your hand.
And it can be so thin
that you cannot see.
It's invisible.
So the farts of a
bunch of bacteria
whose entire colonies are so
thin you can't even see them?
What's that going to
amount to on a planet
with a huge atmosphere?
Nothing.
Well, eventually, over
two billion years,
the farts built up.
And they built up
to the point where
we had a toxically-polluted
atmosphere.
And the atmosphere was
killing off the bacteria.
It was killing off the first
life forms on this planet.
And that was called--
well, we won't go into what
it was called for a second.
Some bacteria worked
out a very clever deal.
There were
teenie-weenie bacteria
that knew how to take
this toxic pollutant
and actually turn it into
stuff that could make energy.
So the big bacteria made a
deal with the little bacteria.
You live inside of us.
We'll find you the
greatest places
you ever imagined to live.
We'll get you every resource
you ever imagined in life.
We'll keep you feasting
and happy like crazy.
You just feed us
what you shit out.
Because what they
shat out-- what
these little tiny
things that feasted
on the toxic
pollutants shat out--
were ambrosia to
the big bacteria.
Well, that toxic pollutant--
the big, first, really big
toxic pollutant catastrophe
in the history of the planet--
that toxic pollutant was
called oxygen. And there's
a lesson in that, which
is every toxic pollutant
is a fuel waiting to be found.
It's a resource.
It is-- it's a feast
waiting to be discovered.
I mean, one idea you discussed
in "The Lucifer Principle"
is kind of conceiving
of evil differently.
When they wrote
exultantly about this mass
die off that killed off
almost everything on Earth,
I thought what did we
learn from World War II?
You don't stand by and exalt
over a mass murder of any kind.
You rebel against it with
all your heart and soul.
So I wrote a book specifically
about mass murder,
about hatred, about
violence, about war,
about it's evolutionary origins,
about how essential evil is
to nature, and how essential
it is that we oppose
nature to make nature just.
So let's talk about
that opposing of nature.
What does that mean exactly?
Well, it meant, in the case
of the bacteria that managed
to escape the Great
Oxygen Catastrophe,
taking something that
seemed brutally unnatural,
this poisonous gas, oxygen,
and turning it into the source
of the next paradise.
What does it mean
for human beings?
What it means for human beings
is re-conceiving everything
around us that we
were regard as dark
and ominous as a
potential resource.
Including, for
example, right now
our major concern is the carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere.
Another major concern
is global warming.
Look, nature's taken
advantage of global warming
over and over again.
She's had it over and over
again, long before we existed.
One of the things that natured
used a climate catastrophe
to create was the human brain.
We grew up on the
edge of glaciers.
We grew up in an age of ice.
We grew up overcoming
catastrophe.
That's how we got the
brains we have today.
Our task is to take
these two big challenges
and to turn them into the
next great source of wonder.
Global warming
and carbon dioxide?
Yeah, that carbon
dioxide in the air
is just-- it's fuel and
energy waiting to be made.
So how do we do that?
Well, I have a friend
who is the chief scientist
at NASA Langley.
And he wants to take
massive quantities of algae.
Algae are really good-- two
things are really good at this.
They really know how
to take carbon dioxide
and make the most of it.
Trees and algae.
In fact, anything
that's green knows
how to take carbon dioxide
and make the most of it.
So encourage green things.
Now, the green
things are already
encouraging themselves,
thanks to modern agriculture,
which we're supposed to hate.
Our footprint on
the land, in order
to feed seven
billion people now,
is so much smaller than it used
to be that it's ridiculous.
Which means there are vast
amounts of former farmland
that have been--
Are you including aspects
like a nitrogen runoff
from industrial pollution?
No I'm not including
that for the moment.
But we could discuss that too.
The point is that forests are
taking over the empty farmland
that's been left behind.
And forests are great at
processing carbon dioxide.
We can take algae and
turn them into fuel.
Liquid fuel, we can turn
them into just about any kind
of energy source you want.
And the trick is to raise
them in mass quantities
and get them to gobble that
stuff up out of the atmosphere
and turn it into hey, the
next great source of wealth.
So a lot of people
are concerned
that humanity-- I mean, it's
such a complicated moment.
Because on the one
hand, we seem like we've
never been doing better.
-Right.
I mean, you and I have
discussed how people are living
longer and healthier lives.
Right.
Certainly, in
the industrialized
first-world countries.
Right.
And yet, a lot of
us feel that we're
teetering on the
brink of potentially
annihilating ourselves.
If we look at the
oceans becoming
30% more acidic, the
species extinction crisis,
the coral reefs disintegrating.
Is your perspective, then,
that we're kind of, like,
in the process of kind of
overcoming these obstacles?
We are in the process of
overcoming the obstacles.
All of the protest movements
against these problems
are extremely helpful in
overcoming the obstacles.
But we have to keep
from doing ourselves
in with a negative perception.
For example, since 18-- if we'd
been born at 1850-- the two
of us sitting at this
table, the people
sitting in this room--
our life expectancy
would've been 38.5 years.
If we'd been born in
2000, our life expectancy
would have been 78.5 years.
That's a doubling of
the human lifespan.
If we'd been the poorest-paid
worker in London in 1850
versus the poorest-paid
worker or being
the poorest-paid worker
in London in 2000.
In 2000 we would've earned
what an entire tenement
full of the poorest-paid workers
in London earned back in 1850.
Not to mention the fact that
there were things-- there was
a techno freak back in
England, in 1850, who just-- he
loved the latest technologies.
He had all the
power in the world.
He was able to summon the
technologists from all
over the world to bring their
latest items to London just
for his edification.
He built a building for it.
It was called the
Crystal Palace.
His name was Prince Albert.
And he died at something
like 42 years old.
He didn't have access
to the simple medicines
that the poorest
person in London
today would have
access to like that,
to solve their health problems.
We have to recognize the
positives and build on them.
If we fail to recognize
the positives,
we humans have this
peculiar quality.
It is an apocalypse addiction.
And we come up with apocalypse--
Well, yeah, the word
apocalypse literally
means uncovering or revealing.
-Yes.
But--
So maybe you're talking
more of a catastrophic--
I'm talking catastrophic
apocalypse, as opposed
to an apocalypse of revelation.
And so we believe
the world is ending.
But we've believed this
for tens of thousands
of years, over and over again.
It's never quite happened.
But it is possible to end an
entire civilization by focusing
only on disaster
and not seeing what
you're positively creating.
Because our job is
the positive creation.
-Look how excited you are.
-Yeah.
With this stuff.
But Daniel, look, I'm
70-freaking years old.
I did 330 push ups this
morning before I came here.
And it's because I'm doing
the stuff I care about.
And if we all do the
stuff we care about,
just think how much
further we'll all-- I mean,
this planet will go.
Let's talk about--
[APPLAUSE]
Let's talk about the concept
of the technological singularity
that people like Ray
Kurzweil have been espousing.
I think it's a silly idea.
The idea is that
our technology will
reach a point where
all of a sudden
we will cease to be human.
And we'll be something
beyond human.
But Daniel, during
your lifetime and mine,
how many singularities of this
kind have we already undergone?
When you were a
little kid there was
no such thing as a cellphone.
When you were a little kid
you couldn't own a laptop.
They existed.
But you couldn't own one.
There were certainly no
such thing as an iPad.
Today-- back then, when
you walked down the street,
you could dream about
talking to people in Beijing.
But in reality, you were
bored out of your skull.
And in your brain you were
arguing with your mom.
I mean, you had nothing to do.
It was awful.
And now, you can actually
talk to a friend in Beijing
while you're walking
down the street.
People can complain
about your texting
to somebody in San Jose.
Right.
On the other hand, I guess
the devil's advocate--
Right.
--a lot of people
talk about how, like,
there's sort of a
disintegration of the attention
span and inability to focus.
-There is a massive--
And there was that book
called "The Shallows,"
which looked at how the internet
has had all this negative--
It's crazy.
First of all, there are facts.
And the facts are that,
again, if you had--
if you gave the average
dumb kid-- the average kid
with an IQ of 100--
an IQ test from 1900,
a Stanford Binet
IQ Test, he would
register as a marginal genius.
100-- roughly 135 IQ.
Because the IQ points have
gone up 35 points since 1900.
And it's going up
not because we are
dumbing down in "The Shallows."
It's people like the author of
"The Shallows" who are dumb.
They're not seeing the facts
in front of their nose.
We're learning how to
integrate seven or eight
streams, perceptual streams
simultaneously, in ways
we couldn't even imagine.
Is that what all your different
gadgets in your pockets are all
about?
-Yes, exactly.
What do they all do, actually?
I'm on 24-hour
information flow.
Period.
And that's the way I like it.
DANIEL PINCHBECK:
What does that mean?
That sounds terrifying.
It means that
this is the Kindle.
This has a complete
library in it.
I mean, this has hundreds
and hundreds of books in it.
And it reads the
books out loud to me
while I'm walking
down the street
or taking a walk in the
park and taking photos.
You know, I take photos.
And they've been in Art Basel,
which is the most competitive
art festival in North America.
So I'm multitasking.
I'm wearing my camera.
It's in here.
If I can only you know, fumble
hard enough to get to it.
The-- it's easier when
I'm in the park to get it.
You know, there's the camera.
And so I'm listening to
books while I'm walking
through the park,
while I'm doing
this business of the
second law of science,
look at things right
under your nose
as if you've never
seen them before.
And then proceed from there.
-Composing symphonies.
A law of wonder.
And so on, also?
No, I'm useless when
it comes to music.
So OK, so let's talk a little
bit about some of this work
you're doing with the Space
Development Steering Committee.
Ah, OK.
Well, about six or
seven years ago,
a bunch of people in the space
community sort of kidnapped me.
They kidnapped me
because I had written
a book, and "The
Lucifer Principle,"
about the necessity
of getting into space.
Let's look at the
necessity of getting
into space for a second.
Once upon a time, there
was a quarter of a teaspoon
of life on this planet.
And the task of that quarter
of a teaspoon of life
was to expand as
rapidly as possible
before the next
catastrophe could hit.
Because there had been
142 mass extinctions
on this strange pebbled--
pebbled pea of a planet.
-Pebble.
-Yeah.
And you know, this is not a
pleasant planet for life to be.
I mean, it's a planet
filled with poisons.
And the big task
for life was how
to knit these poisons
into something biological
as rapidly as
possible and expand.
Well, we took a poisoned
planet and we greened it.
Look where it is today.
It's astonishing.
And all this was poison, Daniel.
If we've done it with
one planet, and there
all these planets
above our head,
and we're belly aching about
running out of resources?
Are we nuts?
There are so many pebbles
up there waiting for us,
waiting to be greened,
that it's ridiculous.
There are so many things
up there waiting to be
gardened that it defies belief.
So tell me about this Space
Development Steering Committee.
You're working on it
with some astronauts.
You have Buzz
Aldrin, [INAUDIBLE].
I-- yeah, I was
sort of pressured.
I was pressured into going to
a bunch of space conferences
and giving a bunch of
lectures six years ago or so.
And at one of them, Buzz Aldrin,
the second man on the moon,
grabbed me.
And basically, kidnapped me
into starting this group.
He said, look, there's
a presidential election
coming up.
And this stuff
you're talking about,
green-- gardening the galaxy,
greening the solar system,
this stuff's gotta
be on the agenda.
And he was right.
And so I put this
group together.
And it's Buzz Aldrin.
It's Edgar Mitchell, the
sixth man on the moon.
It's a bunch of people
from NASA, the National
Science Foundation.
I mean, Edgar Mitchell was also
the founder of the Institute
of Noetic Sciences.
Yes he was.
And--
How do you feel about that
type of psychic research?
Do you think that humans
have psychic capacities?
It would be nice if humans
had psychic capacities.
And I think that thanks
to our intuition--
if we develop our intuition, if
we develop our empathy, if we
take advantage of the
sides of ourselves
that aren't recognized
by science right now
but are incredibly important
in understanding things,
boy, we can go a long distance.
Do we have telepathy?
I really seriously doubt it.
Is the-- does the research
that's been going on
at Princeton since I was a
little kid in paranormal stuff,
does that really interest me?
No.
I don't really believe in it.
But do I believe that we can
develop incredible abilities
to grok each other, and that
those abilities to understand
each other, to comprehend
each other by feeling
each other's fabric
in our own fabric,
do I think those things
are incredibly important?
Do they expand the Noosphere?
Remember, this is a cosmos.
We're coming--
Maybe you should explain
the concept of the Noosphere
and not assume that everybody--
HOWARD BLOOM: OK.
Well, let's skip explaining
it for just a second
to say that one of-- Teilhard
de Chardin, everybody
knows who he is.
He was a Catholic intellectual
and he came up with an idea
that this is a cosmos
that is beginning
to become aware of itself.
How?
Through you and me.
Through you and me?
That sounds very strange.
Well, yeah, we're
piles of protons.
These protons have been
around since the beginning
of the universe, 13.77
billion years ago.
And we're the first
collective project
the protons have put together
that has consciousness.
And consciousness is
expanding bit by bit by bit,
and contributing to this
massive collective enterprise--
it's in global brain--
in which we are neurons--
I was going to
ask you about that.
Yeah-- called culture.
And the more concepts we can
contribute to culture that help
the cosmos extend her own
understanding of herself,
hey, the greater the gift
to us in personal insight,
and the further this
cosmos is going,
barreling down the
path to God knows
where the cosmos is going.
But it is going somewhere.
So I forget the question.
[LAUGHTER]
Well, I was asking you
about the Space Development
Steering Committee, I believe.
And we were talking
about how-- the necessity
of getting off this planet.
Right, and the Noetic stuff.
So you were talking about--
Right, Inst. of
Noetic Sciences.
--yeah, Edgar--
Edgar's Noetic stuff.
And yeah, there is a validity.
Even for me, I'm a down-to-earth
sort of materialist.
I'm not a-- you
know, I dropped out
of school to pursue [INAUDIBLE]
When I was 18 years old.
And got-- and apparently
was so serious about it,
a bunch of people
dropped out of their jobs
and started hitchhiking
and riding the rails
and following me around
on the west coast.
And it became a movement.
So look, when you are
looking for insight,
take every path you can.
And-- and the insights that
you get from enlightenment
are incredibly important.
So add those to the pile.
They're necessities.
Science is about every adventure
you can possibly conceive,
every adventure you can
possibly have in the name
of expanding insight.
Why expand insight?
Because you're expanding
that Noosphere.
You're expanding the cosmos
capacity to understand herself,
to reflect herself
symbolically in some way that's
never been achieved before.
Nice.
And your new book is
"The God Problem."
The new book is
And the new book--
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Well,
what "The God Problem?"
"The God Problem" is
this-- if you're like me,
rigidly committed
scientistic person,
and you've got a problem.
How did the cosmos come to be?
How did a nothing-- how did a
something come from a nothing?
How did that something
develop into a little ball
of space and time
expanding at super speed?
What the hell are
space and time?
Where in the world did
space and time come from?
How did the first quarks--
the first particles--
come popping out of that space
and time is if from nowhere?
How?
How did you and I get here?
These are enormous problems
of cosmic creativity.
And they haven't been
posed within science.
They are not being
posed, Daniel.
And if you don't pose a
problem you certainly are not
going to be able to solve it.
This book tries to put that
problem right in your face.
And what kind of--
what kind of ideas
do come up with as explanatory
grids or reference?
The basic idea is called
Corollary Generator Theory.
And it takes you back to
when you were in high school
and you were in geometry class.
And at the beginning of the
year they gave you four axioms.
And for the rest of
the year, every week,
you had to derive a
corollary from those axioms.
And by the end of the year you
had the whole geometric system.
What?
How was an entire geometric
system implicit in four axioms?
How was the equivalent
of an entire geometry
book implicit in
165 words of axioms?
How in the world
does that happen?
And supposing that the
universe started out like that.
Suppose the universe started out
with a handful of simple rules.
Let's say, three or four.
And then every
homework assignment,
the Universe had to derive
the next set of corollaries,
the next things implicit
in those axioms.
Have you looked at
the work of Lee Smolin?
HOWARD BLOOM: Yes, absolutely.
I mean, he had an idea,
a cosmological idea,
that black holes are
kind of entry points
into new universes and
different cosmological concepts.
Exactly.
And that's a nice idea.
But then the
question is how does
a black hole produce a cosmos?
And how does the cosmos do
space and time, or whatever it
does in its particular cosmos?
How does it do matter?
And this basically says,
supposing that the cosmos is
like a geometric system, like
a logical system-- it actually
uses Peano's postulates-- from
which, if you work hard enough,
you can derive the
whole natural number
system-- roughly 12
textbooks worth of material--
from 165 words.
And then, of course, if
that hypothesis is accurate,
if that's how the universe
does do her thing, why?
How in the world
does that happen?
How in the world can
these massive amounts
of implicit stuff be there in
just a handful of magic beans?
And what are you
foreseeing now?
Or how do you look at the near
future for human civilization,
and even for New York?
I mean, do you think New York is
in danger of being under flood
waters in 20 years, 30 years?
It's very hard for me to
judge the global warming
and climate change predictions.
Because I'm inside of science
in my own peculiar outsider way.
And what I've watched is
this incredible conformity
enforcement within the
scientific community,
to go along with the
concept of global warming,
and especially anthropogenic--
manmade-- global warming.
And the pressure's been intense.
It's been like the days
of the Inquisition.
If you didn't believe
in the program
and you didn't promote it you
were frozen out of science.
That's not how science is done.
Now--
So you have questions
whether anthropogenic climate
change is happening?
-Yes.
I mean, all the climate models
could be absolutely accurate.
New York could end up
under 30 feet of water.
That would be a disaster.
But one thing to
recognize, Daniel,
is that this has been
a planet of climate
change, massive climate change,
ever since the beginning.
Once upon a time, we
had snowball artists.
So whatever this
change is, it would
be a catalyst for
the next evolution
of human culture in some sense?
It's a catalyst for us
humans to wake up to the fact
that this is not a
planet of stasis.
That our ideas of
equilibrium-- as
in thermodynamic equilibrium
and ecological equilibrium--
are totally false.
They have nothing to do with
this universe we live in.
And that this is a universe in
a state of accelerating balance.
And it's a balance.
It's like you're
being on a bicycle.
You have to balance to the
left, balance to the right.
And if you don't
keep moving forward,
you're dead in the water.
So there is never a stasis.
There has never been
a Garden of Eden
on this planet that
has just stayed
wonderful, lush,
green and loving.
It's the other way around.
This been a vicious planet where
terrible things have happened.
We're the only ones who
conceive of just things.
Our job is to make justice
in this place of viciousness.
Mhm.
So how do you see,
potentially, human society
kind of evolving maybe, in
the next, like, half century?
I think we have-- and this
can't happen in half a century.
But we have to know that
everything that's ever been
on a seashore
eventually has ended up
on the top of a
mountain, that this is
a planet of cataclysmic change.
That it is not safe to--
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Do we have
a-- does humanity have a role
in the planet in some sense?
As a supported organism?
Absolutely.
We've been changing
things dramatically.
But remember, we're
not the first things
to change things dramatically.
Look with those
cyanobacteria did
when they totally changed
the nature of the atmosphere
of the planet.
Look what flowers did when they
enlisted animals in order to be
their transport mechanisms.
Right now, we could say that
grain, wheat, barley, corn,
have basically suckered us into
finding, absolutely, the best
places for them to live, the
best genetic combinations
with which to survive.
I mean, boy, they're going
they-- hogs and cattle
and sheep-- are doing
incredible box office,
thanks to using us humans.
[LAUGHTER]
You know?
Suckering us into the process.
Well, but we do make change.
And we're the first
conscious change makers.
And we do have to know
that our cities will
have to float at some point.
And it won't happen-- and we
have to be beyond just settling
a city on a shelf
next to a coast,
assuming the coast is
going to stay there.
No.
The coast is never
going to stay there.
Our job is to make cities that
can float with the change.
Potentially out in space.
Yes, including
cities out in space.
Because you can take--
you can build a tin
can out of glass and steel.
You can make it from
the lunar regolith.
You can make it from the
rock and dust on the moon.
Or you can make it
from asteroid stuff.
You can rotate it to give
it artificial gravity.
You can make a
big enough to have
500 square miles of territory.
You can put forests, farms,
puppy dogs, wildlife,
lakes, everything that
you love, everything
that you want up there.
You can make real
estate in space.
And that's making ecosystems.
That's making new
homes for life.
Now, I mean, in
the '60s, there was
a lot of you know,
kind of looking
forward to space migration.
Like, Timothy Leary, obviously--
-Right.
--was one of the people who
was involved in that idea.
And somehow, it's like
our culture drifted away
from that as kind of a
motivation or incentive
or even, like, an ideal.
Why do you think
there was that drift?
And do you think
it's possible that it
could be kind of
repositioned as-- as
a central focus for the future?
Societies go
through-- and humans,
you and I have done this--
we go through these flows.
And at some points we are
wildly exuberant about all kinds
of possibility.
And it's a biological thing
and a perceptual thing.
And then we go into
the opposite, where we
think everything is a danger.
Everything's a risk.
We want to recoil
from everything.
And since the 1960s, especially
since the early 1970s,
our society's been in that
recoil from the natural world,
as if everything is a danger.
Everything is a risk.
All we see are the dangers.
Hey, I got news for you.
The job of humanity is
to see the positive side
to why, to make it happen.
To make the next level
of evolution happen.
And if we don't do it,
the Chinese will do it.
Because right now they
have the kind of exuberance
that we lost around 1973.
-The Chinese do?
Mhm.
So-- so what--
HOWARD BLOOM: You look
doubtful about that, Daniel.
Well, today-- I mean,
what do you think
is actually happening then?
You think that-- I mean,
there's-- I noticed--
in some of your work, a kind of
almost like a patriotic tinge
of kind of, like, the
US has some kind of role
to play or kind of potential.
I'm a wild American chauvinist.
Is that right?
I believe-- yeah.
I believe in freedom of speech.
I believe in pluralism.
I believe in tolerance.
I believe in nourishing new
points of view, constantly.
But what about the
shadow aspects of America?
I mean, for instance, the
wars, the War on Drugs,
you know the massive
incarcerations of minority
populations and all that stuff?
Those things are hideous.
And under the president I voted
for, twice, Obama, they're
getting worse, of all things.
My president is
making things worse.
He doesn't seem to understand
the Constitution of the United
States and what it stands for.
But guess what?
We still have the right to
protest against these things.
We still have the right to stand
up and be counted, stand up
and stand in the way, to
become obstacles in the path,
and to make sure that the
principles that we believe in
are principles that
are instantiated,
that are turned
into realities, that
are reified in this country.
-Thank you.
What's your next book topic?
Do you have another
one in the works?
It's called "The Case of
the Consumerist Cosmos."
And it says that we are
making a massive mistake
in our definition of
nature, in our view
of what nature is all about.
That we loathe several things.
We loathe consumerism,
materialism,
vain display, and waste.
And we think those are
uniquely ours, uniquely
Western, uniquely capitalist.
And they're not.
They've been in the cosmos.
They've been a part
of the cosmic process
since the very beginning.
I mean, nature,
just as an example.
Nature, once upon
a time, invented
this thing called death.
She invented it in
the days after she
birthed the first stars and
she started to kill them off.
Death is the most materialist
throw-away wasteful thing
you can possibly imagine.
And it's vicious.
And it's cruel.
And it comes from nature.
So our job is to conceive
not only how to do
what nature does but better.
It's how to do what
nature does but with more
warmth and compassion.
How does that relate
to the subject of death?
Well, death has got to go.
[LAUGHTER]
[APPLAUSE]
And we--
WOMAN: It's not going anywhere.
It's going somewhere.
We just heard a voice
from the gallery,
saying that death is
not going anywhere.
I got news for you.
Remember those figures
on 1850 and the lifespan
being 38.5 years?
And today it is 78.5
years and climbing.
Climbing at the rate of
three months for every year
that you're alive.
We, somehow, without knowing
it, are setting death
back big time, really big time.
And it's time for us
to wake up and stop
only glooming--
because that's what
we're focused on these days.
We're obsessed with
gloom-- and look
at what we are
accomplishing so we can
figure out how to do it better.
If our grandparents could
put you and me at the point
where our lifetimes are
twice as long as theirs,
it's our job to make sure
that our great grandkids have
lives that are four
times as long as ours.
And how do you see that?
I mean, that seems to
get back to these ideas
of the technological singularity
and the biotechnology
and nanotechnology
and their capacities.
We're not quite sure.
Because when we talk
about nanotechnology
and the singularity we're
talking as reductionists.
We're talking as if there's
just one silver bullet.
No.
This is not planet.
This is not a cosmos
of silver bullets.
This is a cosmos
of big pictures.
This is a cosmos of grand
tapestries and grand weaves.
It's a cosmos of recipes.
And we have to stop
looking at things
as one individual
thing is the answer.
There are weaves of answers.
Why was I able to do
330 push ups today,
and it's a month after
I turned 70 years old?
Daniel, I don't know.
But whatever it is,
it's my job to find out
so that other people
can do it too.
And so what do you think
about capitalism itself?
I mean, some people
would say that you know,
it's-- obviously, it's
produced a lot of these amazing
effects that you've discussed.
-Right.
But that-- that
it's, obviously,
a very creative and
also, in some ways,
wasteful and destructive system.
Do you think that capitalism
or certain aspects of it
might be transitional?
Or do you feel that with
capitalism we discovered
something that's kind
of totally in alignment
with nature's principles
and that'll always
be with us in some sense?
Well, I think that
capitalism is totally aligned
with nature's principles.
Because just like nature,
we don't understand it.
We understood Marxism.
There was a nice big book
about it by Karl Marx.
It was a philosophy.
Capitalism is not a philosophy.
It grew of itself.
And we're not quite
entirely sure how.
Capitalism has its creative
aspect and it is phenomenal.
Look at Miki and
her wild pizzas.
Miki, who's about
to come up on stage,
at God knows what moment.
But at any great, her
pizzas are incredible.
She has an underwear company.
And the underwear company's
trying to accomplish things
for girls that are phenomenal.
These are things that you
can do with capitalism.
I mean, I'm a
freaking science geek.
That's all I am, which
means I'm incapable of doing
anything real in life.
But I ran-- but I ran two
successful businesses.
You know?
Because I needed to get out
there into the real world
and do some expeditions
and explore where
the wild ones were.
And capitalism
allowed me to do that.
And it was a phenomenal,
phenomenal experience.
Are there criminal
aspects to capitalism?
You bet.
But what's our job?
We don't tear cities apart
and go back to the countryside
because there are
muggers in the streets.
We stop the muggers.
And it's our job
to stop the muggers
in the capitalist system too.
-Awesome.
OK, well, listen, let's
take a little break.
And we'll come back with Miki
Agrawal and Amber Lasciak.
HOWARD BLOOM: All
right, terrific.
-Thanks so much.
-Thanks.
[APPLAUSE]
NARRATOR: Miki Agrawal has
taken socially-conscious
entrepreneurship
to another level.
After discovering she
was lactose intolerant,
she founded a highly
acclaimed farm-to-table pizza
restaurant that offers Vegan
alternatives called Wild.
She is also a co-founder of
Thinx, a company that empowers
women by producing a high-tech
underwear solution for women
during their time of the month.
Thinx has teamed
up with AFRIpads
in Uganda, who has agreed to
donate seven reusable cloth
pads for every underwear
sold, in an effort
to get girls back to school.
Miki has just released her first
book entitled, "Do Cool Shit.
Quit Your Day Job.
Start your Own Business and
Live Happily Ever After."
She has spoken at TedX, the UN
Sustainability Summit, Women's
Collaborative, and Google.
She was also awarded the
2013 Tribeca Film Festival's
Disruptive Innovation award.
Amber Lasciak is the co-founder
of REDU, a start-up company
that rescues large amounts
of discarded material
en route to landfill
and employs artists
and designers to reconfigure
it into furniture and art.
REDU was a response to
years a bearing witness
to the massive amounts
of New York City waste
shipped off to landfills.
REDU's governing belief is with
the infusion of creativity,
there is no such
thing as garbage,
that garbage is a mentality.
For the last 15 years Amber
has worked on feature films, TV
and documentary projects with
a range of talent including
Sam Sheppard, Sean
Penn, Woody Harrelson,
Mark Wahlberg, DMX, and the
Marley brothers, to name a few.
She Co-produced
"Raw for 30 Days,"
chronicling type 1 diabetics
on a raw food diet,
And is also developing
Mush, a raw food bar.
To add to this,
Amber is currently
forming a slate
for her production
company, Revisionary Films.
[APPLAUSE]
Thanks, everybody.
I'm Daniel Pinchbeck.
Welcome back to "Mind Shift."
I'm here right now with author,
Howard Bloom, and author, Miki
Agrawal and entrepreneur
also, and entrepreneur
and filmmaker, Amber Lasciak.
So I thought we could
talk a little bit.
Well, first of all, why don't
you guys introduce yourselves?
Tell us a little bit
about what you do.
MIKI AGRAWAL: Sure.
-Miki?
We already heard from Howard.
MIKI AGRAWAL: Yeah, OK.
So Hi, Amber, how are you?
Hi.
Hi, Howard.
So I guess my-- I went
to Cornell University.
And my journey began like
a typical college graduate,
working in investment banking.
And then 9/11 happened.
And I was supposed to
be there on that day,
working on Wall Street.
But that day I happened to
sleep through my alarm clock.
And I was just
supposed to be there.
Two people in my office died.
It was one of those
crazy experiences.
And I just started asking
myself questions after that.
Like, you know, what
am I passionate about?
What am I here--
what's my purpose?
And that's I started
writing things down.
And I kind of wrote
down three things.
One was to play
soccer professionally.
One was to make movies.
And the other was
to start a business.
And so I just, I did all three.
I played soccer for
the New York Magic
and then hurt my--
and blew out my knees.
The story's in the book.
And then I worked in
the film business.
And I worked my
way up from a PA,
like, picking up
trash in the streets.
My Asian parents were like, what
are you doing out of Cornell?
You know, picking up
trash in the streets?
But worked my way up pretty
quickly and into producing
commercials and music videos.
And that's when my stomach
started hurting all the time.
And that's when my
sort of Eureka moment
began for my first
business, which was
an alternative pizza concept.
So I had sort of
started, you know,
getting stomach aches
every time I came home.
And I was like, what
is going on my stomach?
And I started researching.
And I discovered that I
was lactose intolerant.
And I just stopped
eating dairy to see.
And it actually worked.
My bloating and my gas and
all that stuff, went away.
And I-- and I just-- but
then I went to Europe.
And I went to, like, this,
you know, French countryside.
And I ate tons of cheese because
that's what you do in Europe.
And nothing happened.
So I started asking myself,
like, why am I not-- why-- why,
when I go to Europe,
and to a French
countryside I can eat dairy, but
when I come to the US I can't?
And in more research
I discovered
that it's the process-- it's the
way dairy is being processed.
Anyway, so all this to
say, I had I'd given
up pizza at the time in the US.
And I researched pizza
and discovered that
it's a $32-billion industry.
Americans eat 100 acres
of pizza every day.
And you know?
And why were they not making
pizza for those-- you know,
who had intolerances?
You know, right
now, there are 20%
of Americans eat gluten free.
You know, one in five Americans
are lactose intolerant.
They're just these
huge statistics.
And the big giant pizza
industry leaders weren't
making it better for you.
As I said, screw it.
I've no experience in anything.
But I'm just going to
start a pizza place.
And so I started my
first farm-to-table pizza
place called Slice.
And now it's called Wild.
[APPLAUSE]
Without any experience,
yeah, whatsoever.
And now, you know, we-- I opened
my first tiny little place
in the Upper East Side.
And then opened my second
place in the West Village.
And now opening a big
location in downtown Vegas,
with Tony Hsieh, who's
the CEO of Zappos--
he's my business
partner-- and opening
more locations thereafter.
So things are really
exciting there.
Yes, and maybe you
can just quickly
tell us about your new
book, "Do Cool Shit.
Yeah.
So well, I mean, I do want to
talk about my other business
really quickly.
Because I'm really
passionate about it.
So every month, as
women here, like,
can we just a quick
show of hands,
how many girls have had an issue
every time they menstruate?
You know, where they forget
to change their tampon and pad
and have an accident
in their underwear?
Like, how many girls have
had this happen to them?
Can we show of hands?
Every single girl, right?
OK, so every girl.
We've faced this issue where
we're running around all day.
And we're, like, oh my god,
I forgot to change my tampon
and you leak into your underwear
and stain your underwear.
And it's like, the question
was, how is it possible
that in hundreds of years, you
know, that girls have been--
or thousands of
years this has been
happening for women--
there's no innovation
in undergarments for women?
And so we spent the last
three years inventing
a pair of underwear that's
leak and stain resistant,
that's beautiful, breathable,
washable, and sexy.
And it's called Thinx.
And we're just
really proud of it
because it really solves a huge
problem that every single girl
has every single month.
And the second
thing was, I'd been
traveling to India and Africa.
In my travels to Africa
I met a young girl
named Amale on a weekday.
And Master I asked her,
why aren't you in school?
And she said, "It's
my week of shame."
And I'm like, your
week of shame?
What are you talking about?
And I discover
that she misses up
to one week of school
every single month
because of her period.
And she starts-- and she
uses things like sticks,
leaves, mud, rags, bark.
It's just crazy to think about.
And so 100 million girls
drop out of school every year
because something as
natural as their periods.
And it's just something
had to change.
And so we partnered up
with an organization
called AFRIpads that produces
washable cloth pads for girls.
So for every pair of
underwear we sell here,
solving a problem
for women here,
we fund seven washable cloth
pads that goes back to a girl
in a developing country.
So I'm really,
really proud of it.
I'm really excited.
[APPLAUSE]
-Right.
And then, quickly, the book.
OK, so sorry.
Sorry, quickly, the book.
So the book kind of came
about because when I started
my business, just so many
people came out of the woodwork
and started asking me
how did you raise money?
How did you get press?
How did you build all
these collaborations?
How did you stay afloat?
95% of restaurants
close their first year.
85% of restaurants
close their second year.
Like, how is this?
How are you doing this?
What are you doing?
And I realized--
and I started-- up
to this point I'd read
tons of great books
by great entrepreneurs like
Richard Branson and Tony Hsieh.
And I've read as many business
books as I possibly could.
But I fell asleep
after page three.
And so the question was can
you marry great storytelling
with practical, tangible steps?
Like, what-- how exactly
did you raise money?
What did you say in that
room to get that first dollar
or the first believer?
What did you say?
How did you get
"The New York Times"
to write about you, when
you first-- you know,
when you were nobody,
you were nothing?
You know, those were questions.
But what did you do?
It's not like, oh, and then "The
New York Times" wrote about me.
And then-- and then, like,
great things happened.
It's like, no, but
what did you say?
And how did that happen?
And it's just that granular,
how to go from step
zero to step one was missing.
And I felt like can
you marry, again,
storytelling with granular steps
to get people from step zero
to step one, to really
fulfill their passion?
Nice.
Yeah.
But it's also more
than a business book.
MIKI AGRAWAL: Yes.
Because you also began to
talk about things about how to,
like, build a tribe and so on.
MIKI AGRAWAL: Right
So can you explain how
the idea kind of extended?
Right.
So one of the
things that I really
explored a lot is just
friendships and the people
I spend my time with.
And the saying, you are as good
as the five closest friends
you keep.
And you know, I started to
really think about the people
I spend my time with
and how I felt after I
spent my time with them.
Was it depleting?
And depleting doesn't mean,
like, oh they talked shit.
Depleting means did I
gain something from that?
Am I inspired to do something?
Am I-- do I feel like
I learned something?
Or was I just, like,
exhausted because I just
went and drank my
face off and watched
football the whole weekend?
That's just not
inspiring anymore.
And I think more and more
people are just sick of that.
And they don't know where
to go and what to do
and how to build a community
of really inspiring friends
and eliminate
negative relationships
that just take space your life.
But they're comfortable because
you've had them for so long
in your life.
It's like, how do you eliminate
that gently and create
room, beautiful room,
for inspiring friends
to allow you to make
change in the world?
And so those are also things
I have in my book because I'm
super passionate about it.
Yeah.
And that's part
of the Cool Shit?
That's-- all of that is
part of doing cool shit.
Personal, business,
it's all so intertwined.
You can't fake that having--
being inspired and coming up
with great ideas, you
can't do that if you
have a depleting home life.
You just can't.
So you have to have both.
-Nice.
So Amber, you want to talk
a little bit about yourself
and your passions here?
AMBER LASCIAK: Sure.
I feel like I have so
many things I want.
I can't wait to-- let's see.
Well, first of all, this desk
itself, right, is a product?
Yes.
This desk is a REDU.
It comes from-- so
basically, about a year ago
I started a company
called REDU, REDU NYC.
And it's a recycling or a
reuse and design company.
And they're very
specific about the word
that you use these days.
And so what we do is we rescue
material waste and things that
have been otherwise
discarded and make
them into objects of use, like
this, like this desk we made.
There's an artist component.
Right?
It's a lot of artisans?
Because I saw a show you
had at a gallery in Chelsea.
Yeah, we had our first
show a month and a half
ago in Chelsea.
And it was really fun.
It was a donation for us from
Chashama company, [INAUDIBLE].
And we hadn't
actually opened up.
We haven't actually
opened up yet.
We're a start-up company.
We haven't opened up
yet to the public--
although this was our first
exhibition-- because we
got hit by Sandy so intensely.
And we were just about
to open up right before.
But this exhibition was
sort of, it was fun.
Because it was in a gallery.
And it was that ability to kind
of traverse that edge between
art and functionality, which is
such a-- it's kind of a fun--
it's-- especially for me.
Because if something's
being discarded,
then what you-- the fear is that
if somebody doesn't get it--
which art, you know,
runs the risk of people
not getting all the time-- then
it might get thrown away again.
But if you add this
functional element to it
then you're sort of ensuring
that it's not going to,
hopefully, go back
into landfill,
which is the whole reason
why I'm doing this.
Nice.
We were talking upstairs about
how from your perspective
the concept of REDU
is much larger.
This is almost like
a beginning stage.
But you have a deeper
vision of REDUing means
and what needs be REDUn.
Yeah, I mean, REDU everything,
as far as I'm concerned.
I mean, I feel like-- I
feel like it's a-- I mean,
originally this started as
a-- it was going to be a film.
So I could-- because I feel
like-- because I've been
in film for the last 15 years.
That was my main plan
So I was going to make a film
about how I knew this could
work, the formula of
using discarded items
and putting them back out into--
in a different-- reimaging them
and having-- and
showing that everything
has value with the
infusion of creativity.
You know, just a
little creativity.
And then, therefore, and
garbage no longer is garbage.
Garbage is a mentality.
You know?
So yes, we are starting
with furniture.
But I'd like to REDU everything.
What's everything?
Give me some examples.
AMBER LASCIAK: Education.
The way that we're dealing
with the prison systems,
with the way that we
do so many things.
There are so many kind of
antiquated ideals and ways
that we are-- we're working.
You know?
And the way that we treat
environmental, I mean,
the planet?
You know?
-Cool.
So yeah, I mean,
listening to Howard
speak before and his tremendous
exuberance around capitalism
and its creative and
destructive potential,
and what I thought
about your projects
is that you're really
entrepreneurs who
are really engaged
in kind of rethinking
and remaking capitalism.
So I was wondering, Howard,
what's your perspective
on what they're doing here?
HOWARD BLOOM: I think
that capitalism really
comes from what Miki
is talking about
and what Amber is talking about.
But especially Miki is
talking about reaching
into your deepest self, finding
the stuff that makes you
exuberant, really exuberant.
Not the stuff that gives
you a stomach ache.
Not the stuff that puts you
to sleep over the weekend,
the very opposite.
The stuff that just
thrills you to death.
And having a certain
amount of confidence
that if you bring that
out into the real world
you'll find a hundred
million other people who
are exuberant about
the very same thing
and are tired of
having stomach aches
and are tired of spending
their weekend drunk
watching television.
And that resonance
takes-- remember,
this is a cosmos
becoming aware of itself.
The more of these
threads of resonance,
the more of these
threads of exuberance
that we bring to the
common human enterprise,
the more we grow that
collective brain.
And that collective brain
isn't just stodgy gray stuff.
It is built on exuberance,
passion, and energy.
Mhm.
And Miki, what have
you've learned so far
about entrepreneurialism
and what has to change
and what is changing?
Yeah.
I think the future
of entrepreneurship
has to have a social element.
It has to be social
entrepreneurship.
Because people who start a
glass company for the sake
of starting a glass company is
going to get bored, especially
the millennial generation,
the next generation
of people who have
just information
at their fingertips.
They're just, like, so ADD.
And they're interested in
so many different things.
I think what will
carry somebody forward
to focus on the
one project at hand
is if that they're
solving a global problem
there's a real mission to it.
And you get up every day
wanting to make that change
over and over again.
And you're not going
to get bored doing it.
For me, it's women's issues.
I'm thrilled every day
just to work on it.
And it doesn't matter
how many pain-in-the-butt
manufacturing issues that
we're going through right now.
And just customer service,
whatever, you know?
That mission is going to
continue to drive me forward.
And I think, for
the future as well,
and I think because there's
just so much noise in the world
and everyone's just
being advertised
to in every different
possible way,
I think what's going to get
people to really resonate
with a brand is a
message and a message
that's beyond just the product.
AMBER LASCIAK: Definitely.
So yeah.
Right?
DANIEL PINCHBECK: Amber,
what do you think?
Well, I think there's
an infinite-- I mean,
you can see it in both of you.
There's just an infinite
amount of energy
that you can resource
when you're passionate.
There's just no
question about it.
And passion, I mean, for me, in
this particular sense, I mean,
it's a real deviation
from what I was doing.
But you know you're a
New Yorker and you're
seeing all this waste.
And it's painful.
-Right.
It's painful.
-It's painful.
You know?
And you-- well, OK, you've
made it clear that waste
is also-- I mean, but I
agree, which CO2, it's like,
it's also a fuel.
-Right.
But of course.
And so when people are
throwing things away,
it's very-- you know,
that source of pain
is a source of passion.
Right?
So I just-- it
doesn't-- you're right.
It's like, I feel like I have
infinite amounts of energy.
There's just no--
you can't stop me.
Because Hurricane
Sandy was a very--
Six feet of water, right now.
Ugh, we had six feet of water.
And there we were--
They were in Red Hook, which
was particularly hard hit.
AMBER LASCIAK: We were
in Red Hook, yeah.
And we had-- we were
two weeks from opening.
And we had 5 and 1/2 feet of
water come through our space.
And it was really beyond.
And the most amazing
thing was then
there was all these volunteers
who came to help us.
But the thing about
that is it's the most--
one of the most trying things
you could ever go through.
Because you're in a crisis.
And it's here we were.
It was very-- it was, like,
a very meta experience.
We were salvaging salvage.
You know?
It's like-- I'm
like, this-- this--
Yeah, it's so meta.
[LAUGHTER]
So true.
This had been
thrown away already.
And now, here-- here we are.
And these incredible volunteers,
here they are, helping
scrub down this broken chair.
You know?
That's awesome.
And it's like--
and the passion had
to like-- we had to like-- I
was constantly, like, I care
about not throwing this away.
And there was so much waste that
was created in the Hurricane.
It was beyond.
And actually, the fun thing
is is that in Red Hook,
we did-- I did go around
and salvage the things,
like the metals and the
things that I knew that we
could sterilize and stuff.
And some of those
people in Red Hook
are going to see those
things in a beautiful,
new re-imagined state.
You know?
That's awesome.
But yeah, I think it's just--
I think capitalism, I think is--
it's destined-- if we find the
passion and the things that--
instead of-- yeah, and beyond
the object, as you were saying,
beyond the product
that you're making,
if it's-- maybe you're
trying to make a change,
like, a mind shift basically.
Then I think it's--
Well, there's something
you-- you brought up
that is incredibly
important when
you're talking about redoing
things, which is your theme.
And it is radical
you're perceiving.
I have a book called "The
Genius of the Beast--"
A Radical Reperception--
"A Radical
Revision of Capitalism."
and it is about the fact
that you can take something
that looks like a curse
and turn it into a
resource if you see
the wonder and the awe in it.
I was sitting down
with an au pair
one day, who had just
graduated from the Sorbonne.
And she graduated
in 17th century
or 18th century furniture.
And at first that seemed
like a total waste.
And then I realized, here
she is in New York City.
She's a short distance from
57th Street and Madison Avenue.
Now, 57th Street
and Madison Avenue,
there's all kinds
of antique stuff.
She can walk into any gallery,
look at the furniture,
and tell you the story
of that furniture.
Oh, and its history, yeah.
Now, if you can sell more than
just the piece of furniture.
The story.
If you can sell the story,
then, all of a sudden,
you've given the
person who buys that
a gift of an incalculable gift.
Because what do we
really buy things for?
We don't just buy a
chair to sit down on it.
We buy a chair because this was
the chair made by the cabinet
maker to Louis the XIV.
And he invented a
technique of overlaying
15 different kinds of veneers.
He was capable of
doing that because
of a bunch of new technologies
that had just come into play
and because there was an
aristocratic class that
was willing to pay for them.
There's a whole story there.
And if you can tell the story,
that chair isn't just a chair.
That chair is a way of
connecting with your friends.
It's a way of showing off.
It's a way of getting attention.
And we don't just buy things
for their practical use.
We buy them for the
attention that they
will buy us from our friends.
And how do we get attention?
Waking up their
eyes, getting them
to see the wonder in things.
Well, because
things have value.
I mean, it's-- you
put something--
like, you want to hear a
little story about this desk?
I mean, this was rescued
from a Lafayette basement
where they were throwing
everything away.
And the plexi on
the side-- I mean,
everything, obviously
was whatever
materials we had rescued was
what we were able to use.
But the plexi came
from-- there was
a-- we did a huge dumpster
dive, which I think
is sort of illegal
at this point.
But it was sort of before.
Don't tell anyone.
So but the plexi--
And you were on
LSD at the time.
Just kidding.
AMBER LASCIAK: Oh.
All the time.
But the plexi was-- there was
a place called Cinemagic who
was-- that was moving to
Brooklyn because the rents are
so high in Manhattan.
And they were giving
all their stuff away.
And it's just, it's true.
It's like, we're
definitely after the story.
There are so many
stories already.
You know, just with,
like, every piece,
of where it comes from and why.
And sometimes it's
someone who's giving,
you know, who's
grandma just died.
And sometimes it's-- you
know, it's a [INAUDIBLE].
So it's really-- it is--
it's true, the story.
But I think, more than
anything, it's value.
It's that-- for me, at
least personally, it's like,
you know, things
have to have value.
And that-- and things and people
and everything on the planet
is about-- it's,
like, a value system.
And if we don't see the value
in CO2, if we don't-- you know,
here I am trying to fight it.
And you're saying
it's a great thing.
Right?
But it's like--
DANIEL PINCHBECK:
I mean, I just want
to change the subject a little.
Don't you think that
yes, it's about value.
But in some ways, the
value system of capitalism
still seems very screwed up.
Especially if we think about
income, economic inequality.
That we have a small
percentage of the populous
who are getting
extraordinary control
of the Earth's
resources compared
to almost everybody else?
And we also see, in
terms of a charity
or social entrepreneurship,
that sometimes it's a veneer.
Right?
Like people are,
kind of philanthropy
can be just giving
back enough to kind
of act as, like, a
steam valve which keeps
society from going haywire.
You know?
What do you think about that?
Does that require
something that's
more of a kind of
structural reform
in the capitalist system?
Or is it something
that people are going
to bring about through protest
or are we going to end up
with a society that's
ever more kind of have
and have not split?
I mean, I think everyone
should just take mushrooms
and oh, we'll solve the world.
I actually did have
a dream about that.
If, like, all world leaders
took mushrooms then we would all
realize that we're all
one on the same planet
and it just-- just
like, the borders
are created by people marching.
And it's just so weird.
It's like, we're all
humans on one planet.
And some are marching
in private jets.
And others are still, you know,
living in low-income housing.
Yeah.
I believe in
Ameritocracy though.
I believe.
My father came to America
with $5 in his pocket.
And in one generation
he put three
kids trough Ivy League schools.
And you know, yes
he was educated.
But at this-- you
know-- he-- he grew up
in a small town in
India where his parents
sold saris in Benares.
I don't know if
anyone's been to India.
But it's a beautiful,
magical town.
But again, like I said--
But isn't it people
there are people
who have equal amounts of
gumption and enthusiasm
who just don't make it?
Who fall through the cracks?
I mean, there's a
little bit of a kind
of-- like, even, we went to Utah
and the Summit thing together.
And one critique of Summit
is that there's a kind
of Ayn Randian undertone to it.
You know, there's like, all the
other people who have made it,
living on a mountain,
congratulating themselves
on how awesome they've become.
You know?
Well, I truly believe that if
everyone worked really as hard
as they should-- they
could, then they can
truly achieve what they want.
I believe that.
And I think it's
about work ethic.
People are like, oh
I worked really hard
and it didn't happen.
It's like, no, you were,
like, passed out by 8:00.
Like, no.
You know?
So it's like, how
badly do you want it?
You will find a way.
Like, I mean, I had no business
opening a little pizza shop
in New York City with zero
experience, not Italian,
and no any-- like, nothing.
Right, but it could be there's
a number of people who just,
the brakes didn't-- they
picked the wrong spot.
Or there wasn't the foot
traffic or something changed.
I mean, there's a little bit
of a kind of-- for me-- for me,
that's suspicious in
terms of kind of almost
like a libertarian edge to it.
What do you think, Howard?
I think that Thomas Alva
Edison was absolutely right
and that most people
give up too soon.
I agree with Miki, that most
people give up on the 999 try.
And the thousandth try is
the try that would make it.
That they've taken 999 steps
to getting where they're going.
And that every failure is a
lesson in how to get further.
And the people who think
that the good life is all
about getting drunk
on the weekend
and passing out while
watching a football game,
those people are
defeating themselves.
Those people are creating
income inequality.
Because, again, taking this
incredible, thriving biosphere
of which we are a part
and growing it constantly
is a matter of productivity.
And productivity comes
from the kind of zest
in the things you really believe
it that these two people are
showing, plus an
element we never
talk about in American society.
Undying, unending
persistence, putting yourself
through the 999
incredibly painful
failures to get to the point
where your passions payoff.
Amber, what do you think?
[APPLAUSE]
-Well--
-Yeah.
I think-- I think one
thing, maybe, that we also
have in common is that
we had a health issue
and we overcame it.
And I think one of the-- I
think that requires a hell
of a lot of determination.
And you know, and-- you know--
-Persistence.
Yeah.
I mean, it's-- for me, you
know-- and its vitality.
It's your vitality.
So I think once you learn that
with that much persistence
that you can make
a change like that,
I think that's a really--
that's a very-- because that's
about self-healing.
And there's-- and you're
saying there's no such
thing as the self because we are
part of a whole and the other.
But if you learn that
you can heal yourself,
it's an incredibly
valuable lesson.
In mean, you lost 15
years of your life.
Yeah.
But to follow up on
what you're saying,
America has a huge
population of people
who are handicapped in the
way that we do not perceive.
They're handicapped
because things have
always come too easy to them.
And because things
have come easy
they haven't learned
how to persist.
Discipline.
They haven't learned
the discipline.
And that is a severe
and appalling handicap,
not just for the individuals
who suffer from it,
but for the society on
which they are drag.
I agree with that.
And discipline is one
of those beautiful things
I think you can-- really.
Because it's about-- it ends up
being about love or self love.
You know?
And it's about making
something from nothing.
And then it's also pa--
it's filled with passion.
Which again, here
we're talking about
the fundamental-- the basis of a
healthy capitalist environment.
It's like, these are the things
that I think will really--
will really make a
change if we have
a mind shift in that direction.
And I want to go back to a word
that you were using, Daniel.
The most important word
in economics is value.
And you will find 200 years
worth of analysis of what value
is in terms of mathematics
and in terms of Ricardo
and in terms of
Marx and all kinds
of complex abstract stuff.
Value is not an abstraction.
Value is a passion.
Value is an emotion.
Value is desire.
AMBER LASCIAK: Compassion.
And desire is at the very
heart of what motivated you
and what motivated you and
what I've seen motivate you
for the 12 or 15 years
that I've known you,
and what motivates
everybody in this room.
We have the engine of
an economy in our gut.
And go with the passion.
AMBER LASCIAK: Absolutely.
But value-- you can--
[APPLAUSE]
We have to close
this up in a minute.
we're at the end of our time.
Do you guys want to make
one last little succinct
delirious comment, exuberant
comment in delirium?
Yeah, I think the
two of these guys
are so gorgeous it's ridiculous.
And I think that what they're
achieving is beyond belief.
And I think that the achievement
of this show and watching you
build an empire of
the mind-- which
you've been building for 10
years-- has been incredible.
And we need more of it.
-Yeah.
[APPLAUSE]
And I think everybody's
wish in the world
is to have the light
turned on in their eyes.
When you see people on
Facebook and they're like, ugh,
it's Monday.
You're like, make
a change right now.
And you can.
It's just the mystery of
life is that you never
know when it's going to end.
And you just have to sort
of figure out what to do
to turn the light on your eyes.
You just have to.
And so that's kind of
what my book's about.
Although you're saying
there's not going to be an end.
So I'm looking
forward to that too.
Our job in life is
to triumph to the best
extent of our ability.
And Andrew Marvel,
the poet, put it
best in "To His Coy Mistress."
And he said, let's take all of
our joys, all of our passions,
roll them up into one ball.
And roll them with "rough
strife through the iron
gates of life."
And here's the key line.
"Thus, though we cannot
make our sun stand still,
yet we will make him run."
Thus, though we cannot
actually stop death,
we will get so much
out of every second
of life that we will say,
[BLEEP] you to the Grim Reaper.
Yeah.
[APPLAUSE]
All right, well, thank you
very much, guys, for joining me.
And hope to have you all back.
And [INAUDIBLE].
Thank you so much.
-Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]